Image Streaming 2.0

Image Streaming is perhaps the oldest and most notorious visualization developmental exercise; yet it has often received a bad reputation in the aphant communities—it’s actually a pretty useful exercise when done properly. The originally published exercise(https://web.archive.org/web/20210521052901/http://www.winwenger.com///imstream.htm#Feedback) was not written with the Aphant’s interpretation in mind (rather was written for the hypophant's perspective), and also was not specific enough about various instruction, which has led to misinterpretation and misdirected training. Additionally, while many hypophants may find their autogogic screen is already active, most Aphants will not; attempting image streaming with an unactive autogogic screen will fail (explained more later in the post).

After having worked with visualization development for over a year, I have tweaked and refined Image Streaming into a more direct and efficient process, in this post I aim to describe in specific detail (to prevent misinterpretation) how to perform the exercise, as well as explain some of the theory behind this process to help with intuition. I’ll also discuss common pit-falls and some techniques for continually advancing development.


Understanding Autogogic Noise (Light Noise vs Dark Noise)

Image Streaming deals with the Autogogic Visualization variety. It’s important to understand how autogogic visuals form. There are two types of visual noise you encounter when your eyes are closed: dark noise and light noise. The dark noise is actually just the default visual noise you see, and is an artifact of the eyes; the light noise emerges from thought and is the medium in which the visuals actually appear. When working with developing Autogogia, try to give your attention and focus to the emergent light noise. [Side-note: It can sometimes seem like visual structure is forming in the dark noise (shadowy black regions taking shape) but it’s actually the light noise around those regions causing said visual structure to form as a sort of negative space.]


Understanding Autogogic Visuals (Conscious vs Subconscious)

Autogogic Visuals come in two varieties, conscious and subconscious. When visualizing with Autogogia you will be shown imagery that you did not think to cause, this is subconscious visualization, these visuals can take on a life of their own—changing, animating, and more, all automatically. You have the ability to control the visuals that appear (conscious visualization), typically you will be dealing with both visuals together and you learn to shift into a more conscious space or a more subconscious space at will. I have, on occasion, shifted fully subconscious, and it’s as if I am watching a dream being shown to me.

The visuals (of either variety) can form through interpretation of noise, or through conscious projection. What I mean is, random visual noise can sometimes take forms that are close to what the mind may be trying to work with, and they get utilized as a sort of ‘starting place’ for the visuals to form from (ie Interpretation) or your mind may control the visual noise actively and cause specific visual forms to appear (ie projection).


How to Image Stream

The Image Streaming exercise is fairly straight forward. It deals with the Autogogic style of visualization. So the first thing you need to do is make sure your Autogogic “Screen” is active. Once there is activity in your autogogic screen, you can proceed with the exercise. You should be relaxed (this means your body, your mind, as well as your eyes should all be relaxed). Relaxation is very important for Autogogic Visualization and should not be overlooked, you should pursue relaxation techniques if you are struggling with this exercise.

Activity in the autogogic screen stems from visual thought, so analogue thinking must be minimized. The original Image Streaming exercise instructed participants to speak out loud describing what they were seeing—the reason for this is not because the act of speaking somehow works in conjunction with visualization, rather, speaking causes your mind to not be able to wander with analogue thought (an extreme default for Aphants) because the parts of your brain associated with analogue thought become preoccupied. Vocal describing is not actually necessary if you can control your analogue thinking (side-note: my first time achieving total success with Image Streaming (ie entering an immersive imagined reality as vivid as real life) was during a session in which I did not speak or describe any of what I was seeing). If your mind tends to wander with analogue thought you can try various techniques to prevent this such as using a mantra or describing what you are seeing (this can be done silently or out loud). Whichever you choose, it is important that you are not giving attention or focus to analogue processes, so should you choose to speak (and you may need to if you find your mind wanders, analogue) make sure the speaking becomes autopilot and mindless, you should not be giving attention to your words, it doesn’t really matter what you say, just that you are not actively using analogue thought. Should you listen to music to help aid in your relaxation, please use music that does not contain lyrics, as they may inadvertently promote analogue mental processes.

In a dark room, close your eyes and relax your gaze outward, a few feet past your eye lids, into the darkness of the visual noise that appears behind closed eyes. You may find having a flickering candle or some other dynamic low-light source near by can help amplify the activity of the visual noise that exists behind your closed eyes. Look into your autogogic screen (remember, the autogogic screen is a 3D space, you look into it, not at it).

It may take some time, so be patient and stay relaxed, light noise should begin emerging. When the light noise emerges you need to give it your attention with your mental focus, not your optic focus. Visualization deals with the mind, not the eyes; even though autogogic visuals do literally appear in your eye sight, this is merely an illusion—visual information is being injected into your visual cortex from your mind, there is nothing to actually see with your eyes, so your eyes should stay relaxed. If you attempt to focus on a visual with your eyes, you won’t succeed and you may end up losing the visual, as you will distract mental efforts away from the passive visual thinking that was causing the visual to appear in the first place.

Once light noise emerges, you need to begin forming interpretations and expectations, these will activate visual thinking processes which will guide and coax the noise into more refined visuals. So, at first you may just see a hazy cloud of light noise appear, it may slide into frame, it may flash and then disappear, it may fade in; in any event, you want to begin trying to shift your mental focus to it, gently, and ponder what it may be (not with analogue thought, with visual understanding, which is a silent understanding). You are capable of visual thought, as an aphant—you’ve used it when you’d try to find shapes in clouds as a kid; you don’t use analogue thinking to do that, you use silent visual thinking (you may use analogue thinking when you then later translate the thought into speech to tell the friend sitting next to you, but that’s besides the point). In addition to interpretation, you also should be forming expectation; your expectation (also visual thought based) should be an understanding of what is appearing from the perspective of a would-be entire animated 3D scene that fills your entire field of view. So, if you see a light-noise cluster that perhaps could be interpreted as the beginnings of maybe a dog’s head forming, you may begin to hold the visual expectation that what you are looking out into with your full gaze is an entire 3D animated scene of which the dog’s head is merely a single part that is first surfacing—in doing so, you will have visual subprocesses occurring in your mind which deal with the other components of this scene, even if you are not aware; this causes more noise to emerge in other areas that relate to your expectation and also helps your conscious mind more effortlessly interpret them when they do emerge. The autogogic screen is a 3D screen and it is in motion, so your expectations should be from the perspective of an animated scene so that the motion of the noise is interpreted properly as part of the animated scene and not a visual distortion causing the visuals to misbehave.

Light noise will appear very vague in form when you are a beginner, it may be many sessions before you are beginning to see form that you would be comfortable describing as an actual recognizable visual object. Make no mistake, this noise (the light noise) is an artifact of your mind and is your mind controlling information in your visual cortex—so any light noise which you are able to work with is progress. The goal of image streaming is not to immediately gain vivid visualization ability, it is simply to improve your minds ability to control this noise. As you progress the noise will take a more refined form, it will take on color, and you will even begin to be able to control the visuals and/or change them into whatever you’d like.

When Image Streaming, you will eventually find success with a visual forming to a level you are excited by, when this happens you will eventually lose the visual (this happens over and over in the beginning stages); when you lose a visual you need to restart from square one. The temptation is to try and focus and wait for it to come back, or force it to come back with effort—but, you will just end up wasting time doing this, because in focusing and waiting you are not doing the proper type of passive visual thinking that is required to make the visuals form (remember, autogogic visuals are powered by passive visual thought). So, start over, shift back to looking into the noise, silencing your analogue thoughts (they will turn on after you lose a visual because you’ll want to assess the situation; turn them off and relax), and look for emergent light noise, relax and focus once more on interpretation and expectation, this is the fastest way to get back to where you just were.

Finally, as you are succeeding with focusing on emergent visuals, and their form increases in structure, vividness, and other properties, you will often find new light noise emerging elsewhere. You will be tempted to ignore these and stay focused on the visual you already have, because you are wanting to make progress and you finally have a visual with some real form and detail; but, you need to shift your mental focus to the new visuals that are attempting to emerge. The goal of this is to learn to work with your mind, not against it. You are trying to learn to tune in to visuals, not tune them out.


A Gradual Divided Focus

I am giving this concept its own section, because it is critical and can be difficult to do properly. To increase the complexity, vividness, definition, brightness, and any other properties of visuals, you must utilize a Gradual Divided Focus. What I mean by that is this: when starting image streaming, you start by looking into the autogogic screen; this is where your mental focus is, fully. The visuals that emerge are powered by visual thought however, which requires your mental focus to be on your thoughts. While looking into the screen, you must gradually (it can’t be abrupt) shift/divide your focus to your visual thoughts. It is difficult (especially as you shift more and more focus to your visual thoughts) to remain truly looking into the screen; but you must always be looking into the screen. As you shift more focus to your visual thoughts, the visuals on the screen become more complex, vivid, defined, and bright, but your visual thinking capacity is also increasing, which demands mental focus and mental energy. It’s a tricky balancing act but this is something you need to think about every session or you may end up getting stuck in your developments. Always look into the screen, gradually shift more mental efforts away from the screen and to your visual thoughts, but never at any moment should you fully stop focusing on looking into the screen. Believe it or not it is very easy to end up moving all of your focus to your visual thoughts, and you often don’t even realize you’ve done it and can end up wasting minutes at a time before you realize you aren’t actually seeing anything with Autogogia for an extended period of time (the good news is you’ll have been developing Traditional Phantasia if/when that happens).

Visual noise activity of the autogogic screen is stirred up by visual thought, so being able to divide your focus even when you are not yet seeing anything, allowing your mind to wander (visually (eg recalling any information you can about various things you saw today (again, without analogue thought))) can cause light noise to emerge and take form, but you must continue looking into the screen the whole time this happens, for it to best happen. So, if the screen is empty, look into the screen, divide some of your focus to visual pondering, but always continue looking into the screen with the remaining focus, and relax.


Techniques and Further Development

One technique that helped me A LOT with developing autogogic visualization was taking on the Mental Model that I (my perspective) was a floating camera, in this autogogic space (If you’ve played Minecraft or Halo3 you may consider this as the floating spectator-mode/observer-mode camera ball). Using this Mental Model it became a lot more effortless to float around and move my perspective around the noise that is emerging (remember, this is all a 3D space, and 3D noise). All you see is powered by visual thought and shifting into this mental model makes it a lot easier for your mind to understand and process how to manipulate the visual noise as if you were moving around it in 3D space. This technique helps develop visualization even if you are just seeing vague, mostly formless noise, so long as it is still being manipulated as you mentally pivot around this vague noise in 3D space (Remember, the noise is a mental artifact, which is what visualization builds from, so learning to control the mental artifacts in any way, even as they only have vague form, develops visual control, which develops visualization).

One concept I discuss often in the Community Discord is the concept of “Mental Motions”. When you use your mind to lift your arm, can you describe what happened mentally to cause your arm to lift? This is an example of a mental motion, it’s a mental process you learn to do consciously, but is impossible to describe or teach. There are many mental motions involved with visualization (for example, turning on [activating] your autogogic screen is a mental motion, and you learn to tap into that faster and more strongly as time goes on), ‘projecting’ is also a mental motion. As you work with autogogic visuals you begin to learn to control or guide them using expectation, interpretation, and a combination of other visual thinking processes. This combination of visual thinking processes is a mental motion which you can learn to perform with more intention; as you learn to control your visuals you are also learning to project visuals, they use the same mental motion. As you control your visual noise you should, every so often, try to take note of what it feels like you are doing mentally, so as to try and become aware of the mental motion (as much as one can become aware of a mental motion) so that you can learn to reproduce it. As you learn to perform this mental motion on command, you learn to project visuals on command.

Everything with Autogogic Visualization is a relaxed effort. You should never feel you are straining to focus, things should always feel more passive as if you are ‘zoning out’. When you aim to project visuals, for example, you should not focus hard and try to force them to emerge with effort, instead you just learn to think about what you are trying to see with visual thought and expectation, and this causes you to begin to see it.

When you learn the mental motion of projection, and you can make visual noise (vague visuals or defined visuals) appear in the screen, on command, you may find that they appear not always where you expect them to appear (they may be off-centered for example). You can learn to control the location of a projection by simply thinking about it in the location you wish it to be (so you must learn to think visual thoughts that incorporate spatial awareness) (remember: this is all a mental effort, you don’t use your eyes to focus on where you want the visual to be, your eyes should always be in a relaxed gaze, you use your mental focus to think about the area where the visuals should be). As you learn to project visuals into certain locations, then you can learn to ‘move them’ around, you move them around by continuously re-projecting their location along a path of motion; that is, continuously visually thinking about them in the next location along a path of motion; not by mentally ‘pushing’ them. Once you learn to ‘move’ your visuals you have actually also learned true image persistence; you can re-project the visual indefinitely in the same location, and thus the visual stays without fading (this becomes a second-hand nature mental motion as well). Learning complete image persistence control is incredibly beneficial because it allows you to develop all of the other visual properties more easily. Suppose you are trying to learn to increase the brightness of your visuals (a mental motion); if the visuals are not always present or don’t stay for long, it can be hard to learn the mental motion of increasing brightness, because you can’t even see if your trial and error of arbitrary mental efforts are working or not because the visuals aren’t persisting long enough for you to gauge the results.

Whatever you give your attention to, grows. If you are aiming to increase the saturation of your colors, for example, simply focusing on the colors you currently have, while using silent internal visual questions (such as “what would it look like if it were properly saturated?”) and answering them with silent internal visual thought or visual understanding, will cause the visuals to head in that direction. You can take these various visual properties to their full values using this technique (remember, this is all, always, a relaxed passive mental effort).

To learn to conjure imagery at will in your Autogogic screen, please refer to this post.


Pitfalls

The first pitfall is trying to control your visuals at the early stage, to properly visualize with Autogogia you need to let your mind wander (visually), if you are too eager to see specific things, you will end up rejecting the ‘off-topic’ visual artifacts that being to emerge, and you will end up blocking progress. This is all a very fluid and interpretive process in the beginning.

Another pitfall deals with suffering from success—as your visuals develop in their detail you are simultaneously entering a semi-trance state, when the visuals begin to reach new levels of clarity, they will sometimes get so bright they may startle or excite you, this can take you out of the semi-trance state and your visual will fall away rapidly. The pitfall is that you will try to get back what you just lost with focus and effort, which won’t work, and you will waste time. It will feel frustrating, but you will need to learn to restart from square one when this happens.

A third pitfall is using the wrong kind of focus as your visualization develops. When visuals start to reach exciting levels of refined-ness you’ll become eager to give them more attention and focus. This will actually cause the visual to often go away. The visual was emerging and improving due to relaxed passive visual thinking, you would be exiting that state to give the visual more attention, which will cause the very thing that was powering the visual in the first place to subside. This will feel counter-intuitive, but the way you normally shift focus and attention to things will not work here, the proper approach is learned through trial and error, it is a mental motion and thus can’t be properly described with words here.


Troubleshooting

Please see the top pinned comment, and its subsequent replies, where I highlight troubleshooting information, as it arises, from discussions with various aphants and hypophants in our community.


Miscellaneous

I took a lot of notes while I was developing Autogogia, I really recommend you do as well—if for any other reason, to help share with the community. I spent a lot of time in prayer (James 1:5 “If any of you lacks wisdom, he should ask God, who gives generously to all without finding fault, and it will be given to him”) as well as in meditation, and introspection; trying to gain an understanding and intuition for how this all works and how to develop it further. If you find any insights or have any epiphanies or A-Ha moments, please take notes and eventually relay them to the community either in the comments or in our discord. I used the voice memos app that comes built in with iOS to take my notes, so I didn’t have to spend much time with my eyes open.